---
layout: post
title:  "Fisherian vignette - part 1"
date:   2018-05-23 20:30:00 -0700
categories: jekyll update
---
Today's post is our first (short) vignette of the Fisher series. These vignettes are taken
from Brad Efron's paper and they illustrate Fisher's continued impact on modern
statistics. For the first one, we're going to connect the **Fisher information** with the
bootstrap.

In what follows, we're going to assume that we have data (*i.e.*, realizations of
random variables) $$x_1,\dots,x_n$$ from a fixed and unknown distribution with density
function $$f_\theta$$. The density is indexed by our *parameter-of-interest* $$\theta$$.

### Fisher information

The **Fisher information** is the expected value of the second derivative of the
log-density (which is also the derivative of the so called **score function**):

$$
I_\theta = \E_\theta \left[\frac{-\partial^2 \log f_\theta(x)}{\partial \theta^2}\right].
$$

The Fisher information for the full sample is $$n I_\theta$$ because the observations are
(assumed to be) i.i.d.

So, why do we care about the Fisher information? Well, Fisher showed us that the
asymptotic standard errors of his maximum likelihood estimates (MLEs) are related to the
information in the sample by

$$
\mathsf{se}_\theta \big( \hat{\theta} \big) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{n I_\theta}}.
$$

Moreover, by the asymptotic efficiency of MLEs, no other (asymptotically) unbiased
estimator can do better (versus the Cramér--Rao lower bound).

Okay, that's cool but there's a pesky $$\theta$$ in the denominator. So let's do what
Fisher would do and replace it by its *plug-in* estimate, giving

$$
\widehat{\mathsf{se}} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{n I_{\hat{\theta}}}}.
$$

Heck yeah. Now we've got something actionable that we can use on MLEs as we please.

### The bootstrap

If you haven't met the bootstrap yet, do so pronto. It's an unbelievably useful tool
that every statistician, machine learner, data scientist, computer scientist, and
person-who-works-with-real-data should know, use, and love.

Here's the gist of it.
* We compute our statistic of interest $$\hat{\theta} = T(x_1,\dots,x_n)$$ using the data
  we have.
* Then we resample $$n$$ points from our data *with replacement*, which gives us a
  **bootstrap sample**. Some data may appear multiple times and others not at all.
* From our bootstrap sample, we compute a bootstrap statistic
  $$\hat{\theta}^\star_\textsf{boot} = T(x^\star_1,\dots,x^\star_n)$$, where
  $$x^\star_i$$ is the $$i$$-th bootstrap sample.
* (Note that $$x_i \neq x^\star_i$$ in general.)
* Do this many times and estimate the standard error,
  $$\widehat{\mathsf{se}}_\textsf{boot}$$ of the statistic by the sample
  standard deviation.

For a large number of bootstrap samples, the bootstrap standard error estimate is
approximately equal to Fisher's standard error estimate using the Fisher information.

The bootstrap approach exploits computer-based computation, which is nice when our
statistic is some nasty function of the data; on the other hand, Fisher's approach
often exploits clever manipulations, *i.e.*, human-based computations to produce standard
error estimates. Both approaches are worth having in your pocket when standard errors
come a-knocking.

That's it for today.

### Next up

... we'll dig into the **plug-in** (which we had a flavor of today) for our second
vignette!

### References

This post is related to material from:

* "R.A. Fisher in the 21st Century" by Bradley Efron.
* *Computer Age Statistical Inference: Algorithms, Evidence, and Data Science* by
  Bradley Efron and Trevor Hastie. A digital copy lives here: [CASI][casi-book].

[be-fisher]: https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.ss/1028905930
[casi-book]: http://web.stanford.edu/~hastie/CASI/
[rad1-post]: /jekyll/update/2018/03/04/rademacher.html
