---
layout: post
title:  "Upper confidence bounds"
date:   2018-04-18 20:00:00 -0700
categories: jekyll update
---
Today we're going to prove the upper bound that results from the upper
confidence bound (UCB) strategy. The UCB strategy allowed us to bound
the pseudo-regret by a term which is logarithmic in the number of
rounds played. Generally speaking, "good" regret bounds for bandit problems
are sublinear in the number of rounds played.

### Stochastic bandit problems

As a quick review, here's the set-up for the stochastic multi-armed bandit
problem.

* There are $$\{1,\dots,K\}$$ arms.
* Each arm $$i$$ corresponds to an unknown probability distribution $$p_i$$.
* At each time $$t$$, the player selects an arm $$I_t$$ (independently of 
  previous choices) and receives a reward $$X_{I_t,t} \sim p_{I_t}$$.
* We assess a player's performance by her **regret**, which
  compares her performance to (something like) the best-possible performance. 
* After the first $$n$$ rounds of the game, the player's regret is

$$
R_n = \max_{i=1,\dots,K} \sum_{i=1}^n X_{i,t} - \sum_{i=1}^n X_{I_t,t},
$$

* where $$K$$ is the number of bandit arms, $$X_{i,t}$$ is the reward of arm 
  $$i$$ at time $$t$$, and $$I_t$$ is the player's (possibly randomly) chosen arm.


We'll denote the mean of distribution $$i$$ with $$\mu_i$$ and define

$$
\mu^\star = \max_{i=1,\dots,K} \mu_i \quad \textsf{and} \quad
	i^\star = \argmax_{i=1,\dots,K} \mu_i
$$

as optimal parameters. Instead of using the regret to assess our player's performance,
we'll use the **pseudo-regret**, which is defined as

$$
\begin{align*}
\bar{R}_n &= \max_{i=1,\dots,K} \E 
	\left[ \sum_{i=1}^n X_{i,t} - \sum_{i=1}^n X_{I_t,t} \right] \\
	&= n \mu^\star - \E \sum_{t=1}^n \mu_{I_t}.
\end{align*}
$$

We know that $$\bar{R}_n \le \E R_n$$ because of Jensen's inequality for convex 
functions. For our purposes, a more informative form of the pseudo-regret is

$$
\bar{R}_n = \sum_{i=1}^K \Delta_i \E T_i(n),
$$

where $$\Delta_i = \mu^\star - \mu_i$$ is the suboptimality of arm $$i$$ and the
random variable $$T_i(n) = \sum_{i=1}^n \ind{}\{I_t = i\}$$ is the number of times 
arm $$i$$ is selected in the first $$n$$ rounds.

### Upper confidence bounds

One approach for simultaneously performing **exploration** and **exploitation** is 
to use **upper confidence bound** (UCB) strategies. UCB strategies produce upper
bounds (based on a confidence level) on the current estimate for each arm's mean 
reward. The player selects the arm that is the best using the UCB-modified estimate.

In the spirit of brevity, we're going to gloss over a few important details 
(*e.g.*, Legendre--Fenchel duals and Hoeffding's lemma) but here's the gist of 
the UCB set-up.

* Define $$\widehat{\mu}_{i,n} = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{j=1}^n X_{i,j}$$ as the sample
  mean of arm $$i$$ after being played $$n$$ times.
* For a convex function $$\psi$$ with convex conjugate $$\psi^*$$ and parameter 
  $$\lambda > 0$$, the cumulant generating function of $$X$$ is bounded by $$\psi$$:

$$
\ln \E e^{\lambda(X - \E X)} \le \psi(\lambda) \quad \textsf{and} \quad
\ln \E e^{\lambda(\E X - X)} \le \psi(\lambda).
$$

* By Markov's inequality and the Cramér--Chernoff technique

$$
\prob \left( \mu_i - \widehat{\mu}_{i,n} \ge \varepsilon \right) \le
	e^{-n \psi^*(\varepsilon)}.
$$

* Markov's inequality means that, with probability $$1 - \delta$$, we have an 
  upper bound on the estimate of the $$i$$th arm:

$$
\mu_i < \widehat{\mu}_{i,n} + (\psi^*)^{-1} 
	\left(\frac{1}{n} \ln \frac{1}{\delta} \right).
$$

The **UCB strategy** is (very) simple; at each time $$t$$, select the arm $$I_t$$ by

$$
I_t \in \argmax_{i=1,\dots,K} \left\{ \widehat{\mu}_{i,T_i(t-1)} + 
	(\psi^*)^{-1} \left( \frac{\alpha \ln t}{T_i(t-1)} \right) \right\}.
$$

**The tradeoff.**
Let's pick apart this term and see how it encourages exploration and exploitation.
We're going to use $$\psi(x) = x^2/8$$ with convex conjugate 
$$\psi^*(z) = 2z^2$$, so that $$(\psi^*)^{-1}(z) = (x/2)^{1/2}$$. 

When arm $$i$$ has not been played many times before time $t$, *i.e.*, when 
$$T_i(t-1)$$ is small numerator of $$\frac{\alpha \ln t}{T_i(t-1)}$$ dominates 
and the UCB-adjusted estimate of arm $$i$$ is likely to relatively high, which
encourages arm $$i$$ to be chosen. In other words, it encourages exploration. 

As arm $$i$$ is chosen more, $$T_i(t-1)$$ increases and the estimate
$$\widehat{\mu}_{i,T_i(t-1)}$$ improves. If arm $$i$$ is the optimal arm, then the 
$$\widehat{\mu}_{i,T_i(t-1)}$$ term dominates the estimates for other arms and the
UCB-adjustment further encourages selection of this arm. This means that the 
algorithm exploits high-yielding arms.

**Upper bound on pseudo-regret.**
If our player follows the UCB scheme specified above, then for $$\alpha > 2$$
her pseudo-regret is upperbounded as

$$
\bar{R}_n \le \sum_{i: \Delta_i > 0} \left( 
\frac{\alpha \Delta_i}{\psi^*(\Delta_i / 2)} \ln n + \frac{\alpha}{\alpha - 2} 
\right).
$$

### Proof

Okay, here goes. We incur regret when we don't pick the optimal arm, *i.e.*,
when $$I_t \neq i^\star$$. So, we need to analyze the conditions that lead
us to choose a suboptimal arm. 

Assume we've played arm $$i$$ a total of $$T_i(t-1)$$ times and arm $$i^\star$$ 
a total of $$T_{i^\star}(t-1)$$ times. By the set up of our bandit scenario, 
if $$I_t = i$$, *i.e.*,

$$
I_t = i = \argmax_{j=1,\dots,K} \left\{ \widehat{\mu}_{j,T_j(t-1)} + 
	(\psi^*)^{-1} \left( \frac{\alpha \ln t}{T_i(t-1)} \right) \right\},
$$

then at least one of the following holds

$$
\begin{align*}
\widehat{\mu}_{i^\star, T_{i^\star}(t-1)} + 
	(\psi^*)^{-1} \left( \frac{\alpha \ln t}{T_{i^\star}(t-1)} \right) &\le \mu^\star 
	&& \#1 \\
\mu_i + (\psi^*)^{-1} \left( \frac{\alpha \ln t}{T_i(t-1)} \right) &< 
	\widehat{\mu}_{i, T_i(t-1)} && \#2 \\
\mu^\star - 2(\psi^*)^{-1} \left( \frac{\alpha \ln n}{T_i(t-1)} \right) &< \mu_i && \#3.
\end{align*}
$$

* The first indicates that our current UCB-adjusted estimate of the mean for the
  optimal arm is less than its true value. It occurs with probability
  
$$
\prob \left(  \widehat{\mu}_{i^\star, T_{i^\star}(t-1)} + 
	(\psi^*)^{-1} \left( \frac{\alpha \ln t}{T_{i^\star}(t-1)} \right) 
	\ge \mu^\star \right) \le 
	\exp \left ( -\alpha \ln t \right) = t^{-\alpha}.
$$
  
* The second indicates that our estimate for arm $$i$$ exceeds its true value by
  an amount greater than the UCB---hence the UCB adjustment is not yet helpful. 
  It occurs with probability
  
$$
\prob \left(  \mu_i + (\psi^*)^{-1} \left( \frac{\alpha \ln t}{T_i(t-1)} \right) > 
	\widehat{\mu}_{i, T_i(t-1)} \right) \le 
	\exp \left ( -\alpha \ln t \right) = t^{-\alpha}.
$$
  
* The third follows from similar logic as the second, and is illuminated by 
  the rewriting:

$$
\begin{align*}
\Delta_i  = \mu^\star - \mu_i &< 
	2(\psi^*)^{-1} \left( \frac{\alpha \ln n}{T_i(t-1)} \right) \\
\psi^*(\Delta_i / 2) < \frac{\alpha \ln n}{T_i(t-1)} &\iff
T_i(t-1) < \frac{\alpha \ln n}{\psi^*(\Delta_i / 2)}.
\end{align*}
$$

* The probability of the third event is 0 when 
$$T_i(n) \ge u = 
	\left\lceil \frac{\alpha \ln n}{\psi^*(\Delta_i / 2)} \right\rceil$$.

* If #1, #2, and #3 are false, then we pick the optimal arm, meaning we incur
  no regret.

Now, we let's consider the implications of these events on $$\E T_i(t-1)$$,
because this will allow us to bound the pseudo-regret. We have that

$$
\begin{align*}
\E T_i(n) &= \E \sum_{t=1}^n \ind{}\{I_t = i\} \\
	&\le u + \E \sum_{t=u+1}^n \ind{}\{I_t = i \textsf{ and inequality #3 is false}\} \\
	&\le u + \E \sum_{t=u+1}^n \ind{}\{\textsf{inequality #1 or #2 is true}\} \\
	&= u + \sum_{t=u+1}^n \prob\left( \ind{\textsf{inequality #1}} \right) + 
		\prob\left( \ind{\textsf{inequality #2}} \right) \\
	&\le u + 2\sum_{t=1}^n \sum_{s=1}^t \frac{1}{t^\alpha} \\
	&= u + 2\sum_{t=1}^n \frac{1}{t^{\alpha-1}} \\
	&\le \frac{\alpha \ln n}{\psi^*(\Delta_i / 2)} + 
		2 \int_{1}^{\infty} \frac{dt}{t^{\alpha-1}} \\
	&= \frac{\alpha \ln n}{\psi^*(\Delta_i / 2)} + \frac{\alpha}{\alpha-2}.
\end{align*}
$$

*(It took me a few times to follow that argument, so I would re-read it a few times.
I also put some notes in the [intermediate steps](#the-intermediate-steps)
subsection below.)*

Now, we just sum over the suboptimal arms to get the pseudo-regret bound

$$
\bar{R}_n \le \sum_{i: \Delta_i > 0} \left( 
\frac{\alpha \Delta_i}{\psi^*(\Delta_i / 2)} \ln n + \frac{\alpha}{\alpha - 2}
\right).
$$

This is the proof given in Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi's [bandits survey][bandit-book], 
which is an adaptation of the proof of Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer's
[original analysis][ucb-paper].

### Next up

... a proof of that cool inequality that helped us in the proof of 
concentration inequality implied by the 
[logarithmic Sobolev inequality][lsi-post] a few posts back!

### References

This post is based on material from:

* *Regret Analysis of Stochastic and Nonstochastic Multi-armed Bandit Problems*
  by S. Bubeck and N. Cesa-Bianchi. A digital copy can be found 
  [here][bandit-book].
* *Finite-time Analysis of the Multiarmed Bandit Problem* by P. Auer, N. 
  Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer. A digital copy can be found [here][ucb-paper].
* *Prediction, Learning, and Games* (a.k.a. "Perdition, Burning, and Flames") 
  by N. Cesa-Bianchi and G. Lugosi. Find a description of the book and its 
  table of contents [here][plg-book].

[bandit-book]: http://sbubeck.com/SurveyBCB12.pdf
[ucb-paper]: http://cesa-bianchi.di.unimi.it/Pubblicazioni/ml-02.pdf
[tutorial-1]: https://blogs.princeton.edu/imabandit/2016/05/11/bandit-theory-part-i/
[tutorial-2]: https://blogs.princeton.edu/imabandit/2016/05/13/bandit-theory-part-ii/
[plg-book]: http://cesa-bianchi.di.unimi.it/predbook/
[r-bandits]: https://github.com/jakeknigge/ucb-bandits/blob/master/bandits.R
[lsi-post]: /jekyll/update/2018/04/07/lsi.html

#### The intermediate steps

We can interpret the relationship

$$
\E T_i(n) = \E \sum_{t=1}^n \ind{}\{I_t = i\} \le 
	u + \E \sum_{t=u+1}^n \ind{}\{I_t = i \textsf{ and inequality #3 is false}\}
$$

by observing that the indicator $$\ind{}\{I_t = i\}$$ and be written as
$$\ind{}\{I_t = i \textsf{ and inequality #3 is false or true}\}$$. 
Inequality #3 is true when 
$$T_i(k) \le u = 
	\left\lceil \frac{\alpha \ln n}{\psi^*(\Delta_i / 2)} \right\rceil$$.
So, the bound follows by assuming that indicator is active at $$k=1,\dots,u$$.

Because we allow either #1 or #2 to be true, the event 

$$
\big\{I_t = i \textsf{ and inequality #3 is false}\big\} \subseteq
	\big\{\textsf{inequality #1 or #2 is true}\big\},
$$

meaning the probability of the second event is larger.